Add Ambient Waypoint docs (#357)
openshift-service-mesh/sail-operator: docs/ossm/ambient/waypoint.md

# Getting Started with Istio waypoint in Ambient Mode (Tech Preview)

Once you have gotten started with Istio's ambient mode using ztunnel proxies, you may want to introduce waypoint proxies to take advantage of the many Layer 7 (L7) processing features that Istio provides. This section provides an overview and procedure for adding waypoint proxies to workloads running in your Istio ambient mode service mesh.

---

> Ambient mesh splits Istio's functionality into two distinct layers, a secure overlay layer 4 (L4) and a Layer 7 (L7). The waypoint proxy is an optional component that is Envoy-based and handles L7 processing for workloads it manages. It acts as a gateway to a resource (a namespace, service or pod). Waypoint proxies are installed, upgraded and scaled independently from applications. They can be configured using the Kubernetes [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/).

Author: Updated.

## 1. What is a waypoint proxy for Istio's ambient mode?

A **waypoint proxy** is an optional Envoy-based proxy that provides Layer 7 (L7) processing for specific workloads that are part of a service mesh running in ambient mode. Unlike the traditional sidecar model, where each workload gets its own Envoy proxy, waypoint proxies significantly reduce the number of proxies needed by allowing a single waypoint or set of waypoints to be shared across applications within a similar security boundary (e.g., all workloads in a namespace).

Waypoint proxies operate independently of applications, meaning application owners don't need to be aware of their existence. In **ambient mode**, policies are enforced by the destination waypoint, which acts as a gateway, ensuring all incoming traffic to a resource (namespace, service, or pod) passes through it for policy enforcement.

### 1.1 Do You Need a Waypoint Proxy?

> The **ztunnel node proxy** handles most of the features in ambient mode, primarily focusing on Layer 4 (L4) traffic processing. However, if your applications require any of the following L7 mesh functionalities, you'll need to use a waypoint proxy:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **ztunnel node proxy** handles Layer 4 (L4) features in ambient mode, including mutual TLS encryption, L4 traffic processing and telemetry. However, if your applications require any of the following L7 mesh functionalities, you'll need to use a waypoint proxy:
```

* **Traffic Management:** This includes advanced HTTP routing and load balancing, circuit breaking, rate limiting, fault injection, retries, and timeouts.
* **Security:** For rich authorization policies based on L7 primitives like request type or HTTP headers.
* **Observability:** To collect HTTP metrics, enable access logging, and implement tracing for your applications.

> **Trade-offs:**

Reviewer: I think we can remove the "Trade-offs" section here, as it is generic to ambient mode (not specific to waypoints) and is duplicated in the ZTunnel installation README.

Author: Removed.

* Ambient mode is a newer architecture and may have different operational considerations compared to the traditional sidecar model.
* L7 features require the deployment of `waypoint` proxies, which add a small amount of overhead for the services that utilize them.

---

## 2. Pre-requisites to Using Waypoint Ambient Mode with OSSM 3

Before installing Istio's ambient mode with OpenShift Service Mesh, ensure the following prerequisites are met:

* **OpenShift Container Platform 4.19+:** This version of OpenShift is required for supported Kubernetes Gateway API CRDs, which are essential for ambient mode functionalities.
* **OpenShift Service Mesh 3.1.0+ operator is installed:** Ensure that the OSSM operator version 3.1.0 or later is installed on your OpenShift cluster.
* **Istio deployed in Ambient Mode:** Refer to OSSM Ambient [initial doc](README.md).
* **Labeling:** Make sure the workloads/namespaces have the appropriate labels for ztunnel traffic redirection.

> **Pre-existing Service Mesh Installations:**

Reviewer: Likewise, this is duplicated from line 40 of [ambient/README.md](https://github.com/openshift-service-mesh/sail-operator/pull/357/files#diff-4193baa5c581fa50bfb0347c67edc90fa0e901ebc3d3882dc8e0b8459e327c98)

**Note**: Istio's ambient mode is completely incompatible with clusters containing the OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 or earlier versions of the operator and they should not be used together.

---

## 3. Waypoint Proxies

### 3.1 Using Kubernetes Gateway API

Waypoint proxies are deployed using Kubernetes Gateway resources.  

As of OpenShift 4.19, the Kubernetes Gateway API CRDs comes pre-installed and are supported as part of OpenShift Container Platform.

**Note:** As of OpenShift 4.17, the Kubernetes Gateway API CRDs are not available by default and must be installed to be used. This can be done with the following command:

```bash
oc get crd gateways.gateway.networking.k8s.io &> /dev/null || \
  { oc apply -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/releases/download/v1.2.0/standard-install.yaml; }

> ```

Author: I have replaced the above line with this one.

### 3.2 Set up Istio Ambient Mode Resources and a Sample Application

> 1. Install the Sail Operator along with Istio in ambient mode using the following [steps](README.md#3-procedure-to-install-istios-ambient-mode). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If you have not already done so, install the OpenShift Service Mesh Operator along with Istio in ambient mode using the following [steps](README.md#3-procedure-to-install-istios-ambient-mode). 
```
This is a pre-requisite, so technically doesn't need to be repeated... but we can leave it for completeness.

Author: Updated.

> 2. Deploy the sample Bookinfo applications. The steps can be found [here](README.md#36-about-the-bookinfo-application). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The example below will use the sample Bookinfo application. If you have not already done so, deploy the sample Bookinfo applications. The steps can be found [here](README.md#36-about-the-bookinfo-application). 
```

Author: Updated.

> # Getting Started with Istio Waypoint in Ambient Mode (Tech Preview)

Author: Updated.

> This section provides a high-level overview and installation procedure for Istio's ambient mode on OpenShift Container Platform (OCP) using OpenShift Service Mesh 3.1.x.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have gotten started with Istio's ambient mode using ztunnel proxies, you may want to introduce waypoint proxies to take advantage of the many Layer 7 (L7) processing features that Istio provides. This section provides an overview and procedure for adding waypoint proxies to workloads running in your Istio ambient mode service mesh.
```
It looks like the intro was copied from the previous section, so trying to introduce this page more accurately.

* **Incremental Adoption:** Allows for gradual adoption of service mesh features. Workloads can join the mesh at L4 for mTLS and basic policy, and then selectively opt-in for L7 features via `waypoint` proxies as needed.
* **Enhanced Security:** Provides a secure, zero-trust network foundation with mTLS by default for all meshed workloads.

**Trade-offs:**

* Ambient mode is a newer architecture and may have different operational considerations compared to the traditional sidecar model.
* L7 features require the deployment of `waypoint` proxies, which add a small amount of overhead for the services that utilize them.

---

## 2. Pre-requisites to Using Waypoint Ambient Mode with OSSM 3

Before installing Istio's ambient mode with OpenShift Service Mesh, ensure the following prerequisites are met:

* **OpenShift Container Platform 4.19+:** This version of OpenShift is required for supported Kubernetes Gateway API CRDs, which are essential for ambient mode functionalities.
* **OpenShift Service Mesh 3.1.0+ operator is installed:** Ensure that the OSSM operator version 3.1.0 or later is installed on your OpenShift cluster.

> * **Istio deployed in Ambient Mode:** Refer to OSSM Ambient [initial doc](README.md).

Reviewer: The last bullet only mentions Istio deployed in ambient mode, should there also be a pre-requisite to mention that the workloads involved are part of the mesh in ambient mode? It could be that Istio is deployed in ambient mode, but the workloads/namespaces don't have the appropriate labels for Ztunnel traffic redirection.

Author: Added.

**Pre-existing Service Mesh Installations:**

> While the use of properly defined discovery selectors will allow a service mesh to be deployed in ambient mode alongside a service mesh in sidecar mode, this is not a scenario we have thoroughly validated. To avoid potential conflicts, as a technology preview feature, Istio's ambient mode should only be installed on clusters without a pre-existing OpenShift Service Mesh installation.

Author: Included as a link.

**Note:**: Istio's ambient mode is completely incompatible with clusters containing the OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 or earlier versions of the operator and they should not be used together.

---

## 3. Waypoint Proxies

Ambient mesh splits Istio's functionality into two distinct layers, a secure overlay layer 4 (L4) and a Layer 7 (L7). The waypoint proxy is an optional component that is Envoy-based and handles L7 processing for workloads it manages. It acts as a gateway to a resource (a namespace, service or pod). Waypoint proxies are installed, upgraded and scaled independently from applications. They can be configured using the Kubernetes [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/).

> ### 3.1 Core features

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 3.1 When to use a waypoint proxy```

If your applications require any of the following L7 mesh functions, you will need to use a waypoint proxy in ambient mode:

- **Traffic management:** HTTP routing & load balancing, circuit breaking, rate limiting, fault injection, retries and timeouts
- **Security:** Rich authorization policies based on L7 primitives such as request type or HTTP header
- **Observability**: HTTP metrics, access logging and tracing

> ### 3.2 Prerequisites

Author: Changed.

Waypoint proxies are deployed using Kubernetes Gateway resources.  
**Note:** As of OpenShift 4.17, the Kubernetes Gateway API CRDs are not available by default and must be installed to be used. This can be done with the following command:

```bash

> kubectl get crd gateways.gateway.networking.k8s.io &> /dev/null || \

Reviewer: Should use an `oc` command, but also add a comment that these are community Kubernetes CRDs, which are not supported by Red Hat.

  { kubectl apply -f https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/releases/download/v1.2.0/standard-install.yaml; }
```

> **Note:** As of OpenShift 4.19, the Kubernetes Gateway API CRDs comes pre-installed and could not be modified by the user.

Author: Updated.

3. Enroll the bookinfo namespace to use the waypoint:

```bash
$ oc label namespace bookinfo istio.io/use-waypoint=waypoint
```

After a namespace is enrolled to use a waypoint, any requests from any pods using the ambient data plane mode, to any service running in the `bookinfo` namespace, will be routed through the waypoint for L7 processing and policy enforcement. 

If you prefer more granularity than using a waypoint for an entire namespace, you can enroll only a specific service or pod to use a waypoint by labeling the respective service or the pod. When enrolling a pod explicitly, you must also add the `istio.io/waypoint-for: workload` label to the Gateway resource.

### 3.5 Cross-namespace Waypoint

1. By default, a waypoint is usable only within the same namespace, but it also supports cross-namespace usage. The following Gateway allows resources in the `bookinfo` namespace to use `waypoint-foo` from the `foo` namespace:

```bash

> kind: Gateway

Author: Good catch!
Thanks.

metadata:
  name: waypoint-foo
  namespace: foo
spec:
  gatewayClassName: istio-waypoint
  listeners:
  - name: mesh
    port: 15008
    protocol: HBONE
    allowedRoutes:
      namespaces:
        from: Selector
        selector:
          matchLabels:
            kubernetes.io/metadata.name: bookinfo
```

2. Apply the cross namespace waypoint

```bash

> $ oc apply -f cross-ns-waypoint.yaml

Author: Updated.

```

3. By default, the Istio control plane will look for a waypoint specified using the `istio.io/use-waypoint` label in the same namespace as the resource which the label is applied to. You can add labels `istio.io/use-waypoint-namespace` and `istio.io/use-waypoint` together to start using the cross-namespace waypoint.

```bash
$ oc label namespace bookinfo istio.io/use-waypoint-namespace=foo
$ oc label namespace bookinfo istio.io/use-waypoint=waypoint-foo
```

---

## 4. Layer 7 Features in Ambient Mode

> The following section describes the stable features using Gateway API resource `HTTPRoute` and Istio resource `AuthorizationPolicy`. Other L7 features using a waypoint proxy will be discussed when they reach to Beta status. 

Author: Updated.

# Getting Started with Istio waypoint in Ambient Mode (Tech Preview)

Once you have gotten started with Istio's ambient mode using ztunnel proxies, you may want to introduce waypoint proxies to take advantage of the many Layer 7 (L7) processing features that Istio provides. This section provides an overview and procedure for adding waypoint proxies to workloads running in your Istio ambient mode service mesh.

---

> ## 1. Why to use Istio's ambient mode

Author: Updated.

> In OpenShift Service Mesh, a **waypoint proxy** is an optional Envoy-based proxy that provides Layer 7 (L7) processing for specific workloads. Unlike the traditional sidecar model, where each workload gets its own Envoy proxy, waypoint proxies significantly reduce the number of proxies needed by allowing a single waypoint or set of waypoints to be shared across applications within a similar security boundary (e.g., all workloads in a namespace).

Author: Updated.

* **OpenShift Service Mesh 3.1.0+ operator is installed:** Ensure that the OSSM operator version 3.1.0 or later is installed on your OpenShift cluster.
* **Istio deployed in Ambient Mode:** Refer to OSSM Ambient [initial doc](README.md).
* **Labeling:** Make sure the workloads/namespaces have the appropriate labels for ztunnel traffic redirection.

**Pre-existing Service Mesh Installations:**

While the use of properly defined [discovery selectors](https://istio.io/latest/docs/ops/configuration/mesh/configuration-scoping/#discoveryselectors) will allow a service mesh to be deployed in ambient mode alongside a service mesh in sidecar mode, this is not a scenario we have thoroughly validated. To avoid potential conflicts, as a technology preview feature, Istio's ambient mode should only be installed on clusters without a pre-existing OpenShift Service Mesh installation.

**Note**: Istio's ambient mode is completely incompatible with clusters containing the OpenShift Service Mesh 2.6 or earlier versions of the operator and they should not be used together.

---

## 3. Waypoint Proxies

> Ambient mesh splits Istio's functionality into two distinct layers, a secure overlay layer 4 (L4) and a Layer 7 (L7). The waypoint proxy is an optional component that is Envoy-based and handles L7 processing for workloads it manages. It acts as a gateway to a resource (a namespace, service or pod). Waypoint proxies are installed, upgraded and scaled independently from applications. They can be configured using the Kubernetes [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/).

Author: Moved.

> ### 3.1 When to use a waypoint proxy

Author: Removed.
